# Homework 02

*MATH 464, Rice University, Spring 2020 · Due: Wednesday, January 29th, by 5pm. Each exercise is worth 10 points*

---

Due date: Wednesday, January 29th, by 5pm. Each exercise is worth 10 points.
Math 464 students should turn in complete problems worth a total of at least 40 points
(e.g., problems (1), (3), (4), and (6), or any 4 of the 6 problems) but should carefully read
and understand the statements of all six problems.
Math 564 students should do ALL the exercises.
Unless otherwise indicated, A is a commutative ring, with unit.
---
## 1. Direct limits
In the following series of problems, you will see the construction of direct limits in the
category of A-modules. Limits can be constructed in many categories, but it’s best to get a
concrete handle on them before proceeding to an abstract definition.
A partially ordered set I is said to be a directed set if for each pair i, j in I there exists
$$
k \inI such that i \leqk and j \leqk.
$$
Let I be a directed set and let (Mi)i\inI be a family of A-modules indexed by I. For each
pair i, j in I such that i ≤j, let µij : Mi \toMj be an A-homomorphism, and suppose that
the following axioms are satisfied:
• µii is the identity mapping of Mi, for all i \inI,
$$
• µik = µjk ◦µij whenever i \leqj \leqk (the cocycle condition).
$$
The modules Mi and the homomorphisms µij are said to form a directed system M =
(Mi, µij) over the directed set I. We will construct an A-module M called the direct limit
of the directed system M.
Let C = L
i\inI Mi, and identify each Mi with its canonical image in C (coming from the
map Mi \toC in the direct sum construction). Let D be the submodule generated by all
$$
elements of the form xi -µij(xi) where i \leqj and xi \inMi. Let M = \mathbb{C}/D, let µ: \mathbb{C} \toM
$$
be the projection and let µi be the composition of µ and the map Mi \toC.
The pair consisting of M and the family of homomorphisms µi : Mi \toM is called the
direct limit of M, and is written lim
$$
-\toMi. Note that µi = µj ◦µij whenever i \leqj.
$$
**(1)** Show that every element of M can be written in the form µi(xi) for some i \inI
and some xi \inMi. Show also that if µi(xi) = 0 then there exists j ≥i such that

µij(xi) = 0 in Mj.
**(2)** (Universal mapping property of direct limit) Let N be an A-module and for each
i \inI let αi : Mi \toN be A-module homomorphisms such that αi = αj ◦µij whenever
i ≤j. Then there exists a unique homomorphism α: M \toN such that αi = α ◦µi
for all i \inI. Deduce that the direct limit of a directed set is unique up to unique
isomorphism.
The universal mapping property can be used to characterize direct limits in arbitrary
categories. Some categories, however, are not endowed with direct limits. See
$$
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Direct_limit.
$$
**(3)** Let (Mi)i\inI be a family of submodules of an A-module, such that for each pair of
indices i, j \inI there exists k \inI such that Mi + Mj \subseteqMk. Define i ≤j to mean
$$
Mi \subseteqMj and let µij : Mi \toMj be the inclusion. Show that
$$
lim
$$
-\toMi =
$$
X
Mi =
[
Mi.
In particular, any A-module is the direct limit of its finitely generated sub-modules.
(As a concrete example, you could take A = Z, and the Mi to be iZ).
**(4)** (Homomorphisms between directed systems/direct limits) Let M = (Mi, µij) and
N = (Ni, νij) be directed systems of A-modules over the same directed set. Let M
$$
and N denote the respective direct limits and let µi : Mi \toM and νi : Ni \toN be
$$
the respective associated homomorphisms.
A homomorphism Φ: M \toN is by definition a family of A-module homomor-
$$
phisms φi : Mi \toNi such that the diagram
$$
Mi
φi
/
µij

Ni
νij

Mj
φj
/ Nj
commutes whenever i ≤j. Show that Φ defines a unique homomorphism
φ = lim
$$
-\toφi : M \toN
$$
such that the diagram
Mi
φi
/
µi

Ni
νi

M
φ
/ N
commutes for all i \inI.

**(5)** A sequence of directed systems and homomorphisms
$$
M \toN \toP
$$
is exact if the corresponding sequence of modules and module homomorphisms is
exact for each i \inI. Show that the sequence of direct limits M \toN \toP is exact.
(Hint: use problem (1)).
Let (Ai)i\inI be a family of rings indexed by a directed set I. Suppose that whenever i ≤j
there is a ring homomorphism µij : Ai \toAj, and assume that these maps satisfy the two
axioms given at the beginning of the problem set (i.e., µii = idAi and the cocycle condition).
Each Ai is a Z-module, so we can form the direct limit A := lim
$$
-\toAi as a \mathbb{Z}-module. The set
$$
A inherits a ring structure from the Ai, which makes the maps Ai \toA into ring homomor-
phisms.
**(6)** Let (Ai, µij) be a directed system of rings and let Ni be the nilradical of Ai. Show
that lim
$$
-\toNi is the nilradical of lim
$$
-\toAi. In particular, show that if each Ai is an integral
domain then lim
$$
-\toAi is an integral domain.
$$
