# Lecture 08 — Finitely generated modules (continued)

*MATH 464, Rice University, Spring 2020 · January 31, 2020*

---

## 1. Finitely generated modules (Continued)
Last time we ended with definitions of finitely generated and finitely presented modules.
**Example 1.1**. There are modules which are finitely generated but not finitely presented. As men-
tioned in class, these concepts coincide for modules over Noetherian rings (which time permitting
we will discuss later this semester–see https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/00IK if you’re
interested now), so examples will necessarily require A to be non-Notherian. For one example, let
A = Z[x1, x2, x3, ...], the polynomial ring in infinitely many variables. Then Z \simeq A/(x1, x2, ...) is a
finitely generated A-module which is not finitely presented, since the module of relations (x1, x2, ....)
is not finitely generated. You could do the same thing with A = C[-1, 1], the ring of continuous
functions on the interval [-1, 1] \subsetR. Then m0 = {f \inC[-1, 1, ] : f(0) = 0} is a maximal ideal,
and A/m0 is a finitely generated A-module which is not finitely presented. (Note that m0 is not
finitely generated: if it were, you could construct a function vanishing at 0 which converges to 0
slower than all of the generators (a contradiction). Alternatively, you could show that being finitely
generated means it is principal, and again arrive at a contradiction.)
In fact, these examples are of the same flavor: pick your favorite non-Noetherian ring A, which
necessarily has a non-finitely generated ideal I. Then A/I is a finitely generated A-module which
is not finitely presented.
### 1.1. Cayley-Hamilton on steroids. Assuming that an A-module is finitely generated has im-
mediate useful consequences.
**Theorem 1.2** *(Cayley-Hamilton).* Let M be a finitely generated A-module. Let a \subseteqA be an ideal,
and suppose that φ: M \toM is an element of EndA(M) such that
$$
φ(M) \subseteqaM :=
$$
nX
$$
aimi : ai \ina, mi \inM
$$
o
\subseteqM.
Then φ satisfies a monic polynomial of the form
$$
φn + an-1φn-1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + a1φ + a0 = 0,
$$
ai \ina
The above equality should be understood as an equality of elements in EndA(M).
$\square$
The key to proving this theorem is to think of M not just as an A-module, but as an A[φ]-module.
*Proof.* Let {x1, . . . , xn} be a generating set for M. Then by hypothesis
φ(xi) =
n
X
j=1
aijxj
aij \ina.

Using the usual Kronecker delta, we can rewrite this as
n
X
j=1
δijφ(xj) =
n
X
j=1
aijxj,
and moving everything to one side we get
n
X
j=1
$$
(δijφ -aij)(xj) = 0
$$
Let T \inMatn(A[φ]) be the matrix whose ij-th entry is δijφ -aij. Then the above equality may
be rewritten
T · (x1 . . . , xn)t = 0.
Let adj(T) be the adjoint matrix of T. Then
adj(T) · T · (x1 . . . , xn)t = 0,
so
det(T) · In · (x1 . . . , xn)t = 0.
In other words, det(T) annihilates xi for every i. This means that det(T) = 0 as an element of
EndA(M). This determinant is our monic polynomial!
$\square$
**Remark 1.3**. If A = a = k is a field then the polynomial we constructed in the proof is the
characteristic polynomial of the linear transformation φ. This way we recover the Cayley-Hamilton
theorem from linear algebra.
**Corollary 1.4**. Let M be a finitely generated A-module. Let a \subseteqA be an ideal such that aM = M.
Then there is an x \inA with x ≡1 mod a such that xM = 0.
*Proof.* Take φ := idM in the theorem. Then x = 1 + an-1 + · · · + a0 does the job.
$\square$
Now we come to one of the most fundamental results of commutative algebra. This result is
everywhere, though it’s often working behind the scenes when you apply a theorem that in turn
depends on it.
**Corollary 1.5** *(Nakayama’s Lemma).* Let M be a finitely generated A-module, and let a \subseteqA be
an ideal contained in the Jacobson radical R of A. Then aM = M =$\Rightarrow$M = 0.
*Proof.* By Corollary 1.4, there is an x \inM such that x ≡1 mod a and such that xM = 0. Since
x -1 \ina \subseteqR, we know that 1 -(x -1)y is a unit in A for every y \inA. Take y = -1. Then x is
$$
a unit and so xM = 0 implies that M = 0.
$$
$\square$
**Corollary 1.6**. Let M be a finitely generated A-module, and let a \subseteqA be an ideal contained in the
Jacobson radical R of A. Let N \subseteqM be a submodule such that M = aM + N. Then M = N.
*Proof.* First, note that a(M/N) = (aM + N)/N. Therefore, the hypotheses imply that M/N =
$$
(aM + N)/N = a(M/N). Now apply Nakayama’s lemma to M/N.
$$
$\square$
Here is a neat “application.”
Suppose M is a finitely generated A-module over a local ring
(A, m). For example A could be C[[x]] and m = (x). Suppose you suspect that some elements
x1, . . . , xm in M generate M. How would you prove this? Well, M/mM is a finite dimensional

A/m-vector space. We claim that if the images ¯x1, . . . , ¯xm span M/mM, then the original elements
generate M. To see this, let N be the submodule of M generated by x1, . . . , xm. The composition
N \toM \toM/mM is surjective so N + mM = M. Applying the corollary above, we get that
M = N, so we are done! (The hypothesis that A is local means that R(A) = m.)
---
## 2. Tensor products: preview
Let’s start with a couple of motivating questions.
(1) Let V be a C-vector space. We can think of V also as an R-vector space by forgetting
scalar multiplication by non-real numbers. The question is: can we go the other way? More
precisely, given a real vector space W is there a way to “expand” W into a vector space
that allows sclara multiplication by C?
(2) In a seemingly unrelated direction: let V1 and V2 be two finite-dimensional vector spaces
over Q, of respective dimensions d1 amd d2. We know that V1$\oplus$V2 is a vector space equipped
$$
with maps V1 \toV1 \oplusV2 and V2 \toV1 \oplusV2, of dimension d1 + d2. So in a sense, we can put
$$
vector spaces together in such a way that their dimensions add up. But is there a “product
vector space”? I.e., is there a vector space Wthat we can build up naturally from V1 and
V2 whose dimension is d1d2?
For example, take V1 = Q(
√
2) and V2 = Q(
√
3): these are two 2-dimensional Q-vector
spaces, with (for example) respective bases {1,
√
$$
2} and {1,
$$
√
3}. It seems that W here
should be Q(
√
2,
√
3), since this is a 4-dimensional Q-vector space. A possible basis for W
is of course {1,
√
2,
√
3,
√
6}, which we obtain by taking pairwise products of the bases of
V1 and V2.
We take a cue from this example to see what W might look like in general.
