# Lecture 29 — Noether Normalization (continued)

*MATH 464, Rice University, Spring 2020 · April 6, 2020*

---

## 1. Noether Normalization (continued)
Last time we proved Noether Normalization, modulo a technical lemma, which says that
if the generators of a finitely generated k-algebra satisfy a polynomial relation, then we can
always perturb a system of k-algebra generators so that the last generator is integral over
the k-algebra generated by all the other perturbed generators. Throughout k denotes a field.
**Lemma 1.1**. [Nagata, 1950s] Write A = k[X1, . . . , Xn]/I; write xi for the image of Xi in A.
Suppose there is a nonzero polynomial F \ink[X1, . . . , Xn] such that F(x1, . . . , xn) = 0. Then
there exist x∗
1, . . . , x∗
$$
n-1 \inA such that xn is integral over A∗:= k[x∗
$$
1, . . . , x∗
n] and A = A∗[xn].
*Proof.* Let r1, . . . , rn-1 ≥1 be integers, to be specified later. We consider the perturbations
x∗
$$
i := xi -xri
$$
n
$$
i = 1, . . . , n -1.
$$
Let G \inA be defined by
$$
G := F(x∗
$$
1 + xr1
n , . . . , x∗
$$
n-1 + xrn-1
$$
n
, xn)
(= 0),
and consider G as a polynomial in xn with coeﬃcients in k[x∗
1, . . . , x∗
$$
n-1]. Let m = (m1, . . . , mn)
$$
denote a multi-index, so that
G =
X
m
am
Y
i
xmi
i
!
=
X
m
am
Y
i
(x∗
i + xri
n )mi
!
,
where we use the convention that x∗
$$
n = 0 and rn = 1. Note that am (\mathbb{Q}
$$
i(x∗
i + xri
n )mi) has a
unique term of highest order in xn, namely amx
P rimi
n
The worry is that when I add up over
multiindices m to compute G, these highest order terms might cancel out. Suppose we could
arrange that
(1)
$$
m \neq m′ \Rightarrow
$$
X
rimi ̸=
X
rim′
i.
Then the maximum M of the elements P rimi for multi-indices m such that am \neq 0 occurs
exactly once, and thus we won’t have cancellations of leading terms in xn, so that
G = aMxM + polynomial in xn of degree < M = aM · ( polynomial in xn of degree M).
The G/aM gives the integrality relation we are looking for.

How do we know that (1) can occur? This can be shown by induction on n; the basic
point is that there are finitely many multi-indices m around, but we are free to choose
$$
(r1, . . . , rn-1) \in(\mathbb{Z}\geq0)n-1, so we have a lot of flexibility!
$$
$\square$
---
## 2. Algebraic sets
Let J \subseteqk[X1, . . . , Xn] be an ideal in a polynomial ring. Recall an algebraic set V is a
subset of kn of the form
$$
V = V (J) = {P = (a1, . . . , an) \inkn : f(P) = 0 for all f \inJ}
$$
Note that, since k[X1, . . . , Xn] is Noetherian, J = (f1, . . . , fm) is finitely generated, so V (J)
is the set of simultaneous zeroes of f1, . . . , fn in kn. We call k[X1, . . . , Xn]/J the coordinate
ring of V , and we denote it by k[V ].1
**Proposition 2.1**. Let k be an algebraically closed field, and let V = V (J) be an algebraic
set with coordinate ring k[V ] = k[X1, . . . , Xn]/J. Write xi for Xi + J in k[V ]. Then every
maximal ideal of k[V ] is of the form (x1 -a1, . . . , xn -an), where (a1, . . . , an) \inV . In other
words, there is a one to one correspondence
V ←\toMaxSpec k[V ]
$$
(a1, . . . , an) 7\to(x1 -a1, . . . , xn -an)
$$
*Proof.* It is clear that if (a1, . . . , an) \inV , then (x1-a1, . . . , xn-an) is a maximal ideal of k[V ].
Conversely, a maximal ideal of k[V ] corresponds to a maximal ideal of k[X1, . . . , Xn] that
contains J. By the weak Nullstellesatz, the latter is an ideal of the form (X1-a1, . . . , Xn-an),
$$
which corresponds to (x1 -a1, . . . , xn -an) in k[V ]. It remains to see that (a1, . . . , an) is
actually in V . Note that (X1 -a1, . . . , Xn -an) is the kernel of the map
$$
k[X1, . . . , Xn] \tok
f \mapstof(a1, . . . , an).
$$
Since J \subseteq(X1 -a1, . . . , Xn -an), it follows that for all f \inJ, we have f(a1, . . . , an) = 0,
$$
i.e., (a1, . . . , an) \inV (J).
$\square$
---
## 3. Ideals vs. Algebraic Sets
We have given a map
$$
{ ideals of k[X1, . . . , Xn] } \to{ algebraic sets in kn }
$$
J \mapstoV (J)
To go in the opposite direction, for X \subseteqkn we may define
$$
I(X) := {f \ink[X1, . . . , Xn] : f(P) = 0 for all P \inX}.
$$
1So far, it is possible that two ideals J and J′ give rise to the same set of points V (J) = V (J′), so the
coordinate ring is not well-defined. For now, we’ll keep track of J as part of the defining data of V to avoid
this problem, i.e., we’ll remember more than just the set of points that constitute V .

One easily shows that
$$
J \subseteqJ′ \RightarrowV (J′) \subseteqV (J)
X \subseteqY \RightarrowI(Y ) \subseteqI(X)
$$
i.e., the “operations” V ( • ) and I( • ) are inclusion reversing. If X is an algebraic set, then
we have
X = V (I(X)),
and we always have a containment J \subseteqI(V (J)). However, this containment need not be an
$$
equality. For example, if J = (x2) \subseteqk[x], then V (J) = {0}, and I(V (J)) = (x).
$$
**Theorem 3.1** *(Strong Nullstellensatz).* Let k be an algebraically closed field, and let J \subseteq
k[X1, . . . , Xn] be an ideal.
(1) If J is not the unit ideal, then V (J) \neq $\emptyset$.
(2) I(V (J)) =
√
J.
**Corollary 3.2**. Let k be an algebraically closed field. Then there is a one-to-one correspon-
dence between radical ideals of k[X1, . . . , Xn] and algebraic sets in kn.
