# Lecture 32 — Artinian Rings (continued)

*MATH 464, Rice University, Spring 2020 · April 13, 2020*

---

## 1. Artinian Rings (continued)
Recall that we were in the process of showing that Artinian rings are actually a special
class of Noetherian rings. We discussed the following lemmas.
**Lemma 1.1**. Let A be a ring in which the zero ideal is a product of (not necessarily distinct)
maximal ideals. Then A is Noetherian if and only if it is Artinian.
**Lemma 1.2**. Suppose A is Artinian or Noetherian. Then the nilradical N(A) of A is nilpo-
tent, i.e., N(A)k = (0) for some k.
We are now ready to prove the following:
**Proposition 1.3**. A ring A is Artinian $\Longleftrightarrow$it is Noetherian and has dimension zero.
*Proof.* (=$\Rightarrow$). By Proposition ?? we have dim A = 0. Let m1 . . . , mn be the maximal ideals
of A. By Lemma 1.2, we know that N(A)k = (0) for some k, and thus
Y
i
mk
i \subseteq
 \
i
mi
$$
k = N(A)k = (0).
$$
The ring A is Artinian by Lemma 1.1.
$$
(⇐=).
$$
See Theorem 8.5 in Atiyah-MacDonald.
It uses the two lemmas along with the
primary decomposition of the zero ideal.
$\square$
Finally, we come to the structure theorem for Artinian rings.
**Theorem 1.4**. An Artinian ring is a finite direct product of Artinian local rings.
Before we prove this theorem, note that if A is an Artinian local ring, then the only prime
ideal of A is the maximal ideal m, because dim A = 0. Hence m is the nilradical of A, and
every element of A is either a unit, or it is nilpotent. An example of such a ring is Z/pnZ.
*Proof.* Let m1 . . . , mk be the maximal ideals of A. As in the proof of Proposition 1.3, we
have
Y
i
mn
i = (0).
for some integer n. Now, for i \neq j, the ideals mi and mj are coprime. (This just follows
because mi \subseteqmi+mj and since mi is maximal and mi \neq mj then we must have mi+mj = (1)).

From this, using basic properties of radical we can deduce that for i \neq j we must have that
for i \neq j, the ideals mn
i and mn
j are coprime. But then
(0) =
Y
i
mn
i =
$$
\
$$
i
mn
i .
Thus, the Chinese Remainder Theorem tells us that the map
$$
A \toA/mn
1 \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times A/mn
$$
k
is an isomorphism. The rings A/mn
i are local Artinian.
$\square$
**Remark 1.5**. The decomposition of an Artinian ring into a finite product of local Artinian
rings is unique up to isomorphism. See Theorem 8.7 in Atiyah-MacDonald.
---
## 2. Dedekind Domains
We are going to spend a lecture or two on Dedekind Domains, one of the simplest classes
of rings beyond Artinian rings. They are extremely important objects in Mathematics: at
once the ring of integers of a number field is a Dedekind domain, and these domains can be
used to characterize non-singularity at a point on an algebraic curve.
At the end of these two lectures we will have proven most of the following “defineorem”
**Theorem 2.1**. Let A be a Noetherian domain of dimension 1 (recall this last condition
means that every nonzero prime ideal is maximal). The following conditions are equivalent:
(1) A is integrally closed
(2) Every primary ideal of A is a power of a prime ideal.
(3) The localization Ap at a nonzero p \inSpec A is a discrete valuation ring.
**Definition 2.2**. A ring A satisfying the above equivalent conditions is a Dedekind domain.
**Example 2.3**. The ring A = Z is a Dedekind domain: it is its own integral closure in the
field of fractions Q. It also has dimension 1 since Z/pZ is a field for any prime number p.
**Example 2.4**. If A is a PID then A is a Dedekind domain. To see this, note that a PID
is a UFD, and you showed in the homework that UFDs are integrally closed. The ring A is
Noetherian since every ideal is generated by one element. Finally, it has dimension 1 because
a nonzero ideal (a) \subseteqA is prime if and only if a is irreducible, in which case A/(a) is a field.
In particular, the ring k[x], where k is a field, is a Dedekind domain.
In the homework, you showed that in a Noetherian domain of dimension 1 where every
primary ideal of is a power of a prime ideal, every nonzero ideal factors uniquely as a product
of prime ideals. We record this very important fact:
**Theorem 2.5**. Every nonzero ideal in a Dedekind domain is uniquely a product of prime
ideals.
$\square$
---
## 3. Rings of integers
Before proving Theorem 2.1, we come to the most important example of Dedekind do-
mains: rings of integers of algebraic number fields.
**Definition 3.1**. A finite extension K of Q is called a number field. The integral closure of
Z in K, denoted OK is called the ring of integers of K.
The ring of integers OK of a number field plays the role in K that Z plays in Q. At the
end of our two lectures on Dedekind domains, we shall have proved that every nonzero ideal
in OK factors uniquely as a product of prime ideals.
**Example 3.2**. Let K = Q(i). One can show that OK = Z[i], the ring of Gaussian integers.
More generally, you will show in the homework that if K = Q(
√
d), with d \neq 0, 1 a squarefree
integer, then
OK =



Z[
√
d]
if d ≡2, 3 mod 4;
Z
h
1+
√
d
i
if d ≡1 mod 4;
**Theorem 3.3**. The ring OK is a Dedekind domain.
To prove Theorem 3.3, we need the concept of trace.
We shall develop this concept
extensively in the homework, so for now I will give a definition, an example, and some basic
properties.
Let L/K be a finite degree field extension. An element x \inL defines a “multiplication by
x” map
$$
mx : L \toL
$$
y \mapstoxy
The map mx is K-linear, i.e., viewing L as a K-vector space, the map mx is a K-linear
operator on L. If we fix a basis for L as a K-vector space, then mx will be given by an n × n
matrix with coeﬃcients in K, where n = [L : K]. Thus, we can talk about the trace of mx,
which is independent of the chosen basis for L/K. Define the trace by the map
$$
T : L \toK
$$
x \mapstoTr(mx)
**Example 3.4**. Let L/K = Q(
3√
$$
2)/\mathbb{Q}. Then {1,
$$
3√
2,
3√
4} is a basis for Q(
3√
2) over Q. Write
x \inQ(
3√
$$
2) as x = a1 + a2
$$
3√
2 + a3
3√
$$
4 = (a1, a2, a3), and similarly write y \inQ(
$$
3√
2) as
$$
x = b1 + b2
$$
3√
2 + b3
3√
4 = (b1, b2, b3). We compute
$$
xy = (a1b1 + 2a2b3 + 2a3b2) + (a1b2 + a2b1 + 2a3b3)
$$
3√
$$
2 + (a1b3 + a3b1 + 2a2b2)
$$
3√

Hence, the matrix of mx, obtained by seeing where the standard basis vectors map to, is
given by



a1
2a2
2a3
a2
a1
2a3
a3
2a2
a1



and hence T(x) = 3a1.
The map T can be used in turn to define a (symmetric) K-bilinear form
$$
B: L \times L \toK
$$
(x, y) \mapstoT(xy)
You will prove the following properties of the trace map in the homework:
(1) If L/K is separable, then B is nondegenerate.
(2) Let σ: L \toK vary over the K-embeddings of L into a fixed algebraic closure of K.
Then
T(x) =
X
σ\inHomK(L,K)
σ(x).
(3) If A is an integrally closed domain with field of fractions K, L/K is a finite separate
$$
extension, and if B is the integral closure of A in L, then x \inB \RightarrowT(x) \inA.
$$
**Proposition 3.5**. Let A be a domain with field of fractions K, L/K a finite separate ex-
tension, and let B be the integral closure of A in L. There exists a K-basis v1, . . . , vn of L
such that
$$
B \subseteqAv1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot Avn.
$$
*Proof.* Any v \inL satisfies a relation of the form
$$
a0vr + \cdot \cdot \cdot + ar = 0,
where ai \inA. Multiplying this relation be ar-1
$$
we obtain a relation of the form
$$
(a0v)r + ar-2
a1(a0v) + \cdot \cdot \cdot + ar-1
$$
ar = 0,
which shows that a0v is integral over A, and hence belongs to B, by definition of integral
closure. Hence, any basis of L over K can be multiplied by some constant in A to get a basis
$$
u1, . . . , un \inB for L/K.
$$
Since L/K is separable, the bilinear form B is nondegenerate, and hence gives an isomor-
phism of L with its dual L∨:
L \toL∨
$$
x 7\toB(x, -)
$$

This allows us to find a basis v1, . . . , vn dual to u1, . . . , un, in the sense that
T(uivj) = δij
Suppose that x \inB, and write
x =
n
X
i=1
xivi
$$
for some xi \inK. Since B is a ring, we have xuj \inB, but
$$
T(xuj) = T
n
X
i=1
xiviuj
!
=
n
X
i=1
xiT(viuj) = xi.
By the third property of trace above, we have T(xuj) \inA, and hence xi \inA. Hence
$$
B \subseteqAv1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot Avn,
$$
as desired.
$\square$
Proof of Theorem 3.3. By Proposition 3.4, there is a basis v1, . . . , vn \inK over Q such that
$$
OK \subseteqZv1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot Zvn.
$$
It follows that OK is a finitely generated Z-module. Since Z is a Noetherian ring, it follows
that OK is also Noetherian (as a Z-module, but therefore also as a module over itself). The
ring OK is integrally closed by definition. It remains to show that every nonzero prime ideal
p \subseteqOK is maximal. The ideal p ∩Z is a prime ideal of Z. We claim is is not the zero ideal.
To see this, take any 0 \neq y \inp and note that there is a relation of the form
$$
yr + a1yr-1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + ar
$$
with the ai \inZ, and without loss of generality, we may assume that ar \neq 0. But then
$$
ar = -(yr + a1yr-1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + ar-1y) \inp \capZ.
$$
Hence the ideal p ∩Z is maximal. But then p is maximal: we have shown in the past that
if B/A is an integral extension and q \subseteqB is an ideal, the q is maximal if and only if q ∩A
is maximal in A.
$\square$
