# Lecture 14 — Tensor Algebra of a module

*MATH 464, Rice University, Spring 2020 · February 17, 2020*

---

A is a commutative ring with unit. All modules considered are A-modules.
---
## 1. Tensor Algebra of a module
Let M be an A-module. For each integer r ≥1 define
T r(M) =
r
O
i=1
M
$$
and let T 0(M) = A. For an A-module map f : M \toN, we define the
T r(f): T r(M) \toT r(N)
$$
as f $\otimes$· · ·$\otimes$f (r times). Thus, we can think of T r as a functor from the category of A-modules
to itself. There are bilinear maps
$$
T r(M)\timesT r(M) \toT r+s(M)
(m1\otimes\cdot \cdot \cdot\otimesmr, m′
1\otimes\cdot \cdot \cdot\otimesm′
s) 7\tom1\otimes\cdot \cdot \cdot\otimesmr\otimesm′
1\otimes\cdot \cdot \cdot\otimesm′
$$
s
Using these bilinear maps, we can define a multiplication on the direct sum
$$
T(M) :=
$$
∞
M
r=0
T r(M)
and thus give T(M) the structure of a ring. This multiplication is associative by associativity
of tensor products. The ring T(M) is also endowed with scalar multiplication by A since
T 0(M) = A. The ring multiplication and the scalar multiplication are compatible, so in fact
T(M) has an A-algebra structure. We call T(M) the tensor algebra of M.
**Example 1.1**. Let A = k be a field and let M = k2. Let {e1, e2} be a basis for M. We have
$$
T 2(M) = k2 \otimesk k2,
$$
a four-dimensional k-vector space with basis {e1 $\otimes$e1, e1 $\otimes$e2, e2 $\otimes$e1, e2 $\otimes$e2}. Note, in
$$
particular, that e1 \otimese2 \neq e2 \otimese1.
$$
Thus T 2(M) looks like a vector space of degree 2
polynomials in 2 variables, where the variables don’t commute.
More generally, T r(M) is a 2r-dimensional k-vector space with basis
$$
{ei1 \otimes\cdot \cdot \cdot \otimeseir : 1 \leqij \leq2},
$$

and we can think of T r(M) as a vector space of degree r polynomials in 2 variables, where
the variables don’t commute. The tensor algebra T(M) thus looks like a polynomial algebra
in 2 variables where the variables simply don’t commute!
**Example 1**. 1 can be generalized as follows. The proof is an exercise.
**Proposition 1.2**. Let M be a free A-module of finite rank n. Then T(M) is isomorphic to
the non-commutative polynomial algebra on n variables over A. If {e1, . . . , en} is a basis of
M over A, then the elements
$$
ei1 \otimes\cdot \cdot \cdot \otimeseir,
1 \leqij \leqn
$$
form a basis for T r(M).
Note that given an A-module map, we can paste the maps T r(f) together to obtain a map
T(f): T(M) \toT(N). This is the unique linear map such that
$$
T(f)(x1 \otimes\cdot \cdot \cdot \otimesxr) = f(x1) \otimes\cdot \cdot \cdot \otimesf(xr).
$$
Thus, we can think of the tensor algebra as a covariant functor T : (A-mod) \to(A-Alg).
---
## 2. Symmetric algebra
Let Sr be the symmetric group on r elements. An r-multilinear map
$$
f : M \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times M
$$
|
{z
}
r times
\toN
is called symmetric if
$$
f(x1, . . . , xr) = f(xσ(1), . . . , xσ(r)) for all σ \inSr.
$$
Let br be the submodule of T r(M) generated by all elements of the form
$$
x1 \otimes\cdot \cdot \cdot \otimesxr -xσ(1) \otimes\cdot \cdot \cdot \otimesxσ(r)
$$
σ \inSr.
Set
$$
Sr(M) = T r(M)/br
$$
and let
S(M) =
∞
M
i=0
Sr(M)
be the symmetric algebra of M. In eﬀect, what we’ve done is to “force commutativity” in the
tensor algebra T(M).
**Example 2.1**. We will see below that If M is free of rank n over A, with basis {x1, . . . , xn},
then S(M) is isomorphic to the polynomial algebra A[t1, . . . , tn]. Also, note that
Sr(M) = A[t1, . . . , tn]r
(the right hand side stands for the A-module spanned by the degree r elements of A[t1, . . . , tn]).

The map
$$
M \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times M
$$
|
{z
}
r times
\toSr(M)
obtained by composing the maps
$$
M \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times M
$$
|
{z
}
r times
$$
\toT r(M) \toT r(M)/br = Sr(M)
$$
is symmetric, and is universal with respect to symmetry, i.e., if
$$
f : M \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times M
$$
|
{z
}
r times
\toN
is an r-multilinear symmetric map, then f factors uniquely through Sr(M). We (sugges-
tively) write x1 · · · xr for the image of (x1, . . . , xr) under this map. Note that if f : M \toN
is an A-module map, then the composition
T r(M)
T r(f)
$$
---\toT r(N) \toT r(N)/br = Sr(N)
$$
canonically gives rise of an r-multilinear map
$$
M \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times M \toSr(N)
$$
and thus we obtain a map
$$
Sr(f): Sr(M) \toSr(N)
$$
by the universal mapping property of Sr(M). Thus, we may consider the Sr as functors,
which may be pasted together to obtain the functor S : (A-Mod) \to(A-Alg).
**Theorem 2.2**. Let M be free over A of dimension n, and let {x1, . . . , xn} be a basis. Viewed
as elements of S1(M), these basis elements are algebraically independent over A, and there-
fore S(M) is isomorphic to the polynomial algebra in n variables over A. This isomorphism
is graded, in the sense that Sd(M) is isomorphic to the A-module of degree d polynomials in
n variables.
*Proof.* Let A[t1, . . . , tn]r be the A-module of homogeneous polynomials of degree r in A[t1, . . . , tn].
Write an element yi of M as
yi =
n
X
j=1
aijxj,
and define a map
$$
M \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times M
$$
|
{z
}
r times
\toA[t1, . . . , tn]r
by
$$
(y1 . . . , yr) 7\to(a11t1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + a1ntn) \cdot \cdot \cdot (ar1t1 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + arntn).
$$

This map is multilinear and symmetric, so it factors thorugh Sr(M):
$$
M \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times M
$$
/
(
Sr(M)
x
A[t1, . . . , tn]r
By the commutativity of this diagram, the element xi1 · · · xir of Sr(M) maps to ti1 · · · tir in
A[t1, . . . , tn]r. Since monomials of degree r in A[t1, . . . , tn]r are linearly independent over A,
it follows that monomials of degree r in Sr(M) are also linearly independent over A, and
the map Sr(M) \toA[t1, . . . , tn]r is an isomorphism. Now just check that multiplication in
S(M) corresponds to multiplication in A[t1, . . . , tn].
$\square$
