# Lecture 28 — Noether Normalization and Weak Nullstellensatz

*MATH 464, Rice University, Spring 2020 · April 3, 2020*

---

## 1. Noether Normalization and Weak Nullstellensatz
Let k be an algebraically closed field. In the early 20th Century it became clear that
if one wanted to study an aﬃne algebraic set X, i.e., the points of kn satisfying some set
S of polynomial relations in at most n variables, then one had to understand the polyno-
mial functions on these zero-sets. This led to the introduction of the coordinate ring of X.
The set S generates an ideal I of the polynomial ring k[x1, . . . , xn]. The coordinate ring
of X is k[x1, . . . , xn]/I. This is a finitely generated k-algebra. Thus, it became important
to understand the internal workings of such algebras, and in particular, to have a struc-
ture/classification theorem for these objects.
Enter the Noether Normalization theorem,
proved by Emmy Noether, in 1926.
First, it is conceivable that the set of polynomials S depends on fewer variables than the
dimension of kn. The corresponding missing coordinates of kn are thus not subject to any
polynomial relations. This leads to the notion of algebraic independence.
**Definition 1.1**. Let k be a field, and let A be a k-algebra. We say x1 . . . , xn \inA are
algebraically independent if the map
$$
k[X1, . . . , Xn] \tok[x1 . . . , xn] \subseteqA
$$
Xi \mapstoxi
is an isomorphism. In other words, the {xi} do not satisfy any polynomial relation.
$$
For example, taking k = \mathbb{Q} and A = \mathbb{Q}(
$$
√
2, π), π is algebraically independent, because it
satisfies no polynomial relation, but
√
2 is not algebraically independent.
Sets of algebraically independent elements can be ordered by inclusion. If A is finitely
generated over k, this collection of sets has maximal elements. The cardinality of any such
maximal set is called the transcendence degree of A over k. A set of algebraically independent
elements of maximal cardinality is called a transcendence base.
**Theorem 1.2** *(Noether Normalization).* Let A be a finitely generated algebra over a field k.
Then there exist t1, . . . , tm \inA such that
$$
• {t1, . . . , tm} is a set of algebraically independent elements, and
• A is finite over B := k[t1, . . . , tm].
$$
Before we prove this theorem, we give an application of monumental importance to Alge-
braic Geometry.

**Corollary 1.3** *(Weak Nullstellensatz).* Let K be a finitely generated algebra over a field k.
Assume that K itself is a field. Then K is algebraic over k, i.e., k \subseteqK is a finite field
extension.
*Proof.* By Noether normalization, there exist t1, . . . , tm \inK algebraically independent such
that K is finite over k[t1, . . . , tm].
Since finiteness implies integrality, K is integral over
k[t1, . . . , tm]. Since K is a field, our work on integral extensions shows that k[t1, . . . , tm] is
also a field, and thus m = 0, and K is finite over k.
$\square$
What’s the big deal? Say k is algebraically closed. We’ll show that every maximal ideal
$$
of k[x1, . . . , xn] is of the form (x1 -a1, . . . , xn -an) for some (a1, . . . , an) \inkn, i.e., there is
$$
a one to one correspondence
kn ←\toMaxSpec(k[x1, . . . , xn])
To see this, let m \subseteqk[x1, . . . , xn] be a maximal ideal, so that K = k[x1, . . . , xn]/m is a field.
By the weak Nullstellensatz, K is a finite extension of k. Since k is algebraically closed, it
follows that K = k. Consider the quotient map
$$
φ: k[x1, . . . , xn] \tok[x1, . . . , xn]/m = k
$$
which must send each xi to some ai \ink. Clearly, (x1 -a1, . . . , xn -an) \subseteqker φ = m. This
containment must be an equality, because both (x1 -a1, . . . , xn -an) and m are maximal.
### 1.1. Proof of Noether Normalization. The following lemma says that we can always
perturb a system of k-algebra generators so that the last generator is integral over the k-
algebra generated by all the other perturbed generators. We will state it first, discuss the
geometric picture, and prove Noether Normalization assuming the lemma. We will prove the
lemma at the beginning of next class.
**Lemma 1.4**. Write A = k[X1, . . . , Xn]/I; write xi for the image of Xi in A. Suppose there
is a nonzero polynomial F \ink[X1, . . . , Xn] such that F(x1, . . . , xn) = 0. Then there exist
x∗
1, . . . , x∗
$$
n-1 \inA such that xn is integral over A∗:= k[x∗
$$
1, . . . , x∗
n] and A = A∗[xn].
**Example 1.5**. Consider the k-algebra A = k[X1, X2]/(X1X2 -1). As in the lemma, write
x1 and x2 for the respective images of X1 and X2 in A. Note that x2 is algebraic over k[x1],
but it is not integral. This means we cannot hope to use the inclusions k \subseteqk[x1] \subseteqA to
give a Noether Normalization. However, we can try to perturb x1 and hope to do the job.
Take x∗
$$
1 := x1 -ϵx2 for some ϵ \ink \ {0}. The relation x1x2 -1 = 0 becomes
$$
(x∗
$$
1 + ϵx2)x2 -1 = 0,
$$
which can be rewritten
x2
2 + x∗
ϵ x2 -1
ϵ = 0,
so x2 is integral over k[x∗
1] and A = k[x∗
1][x2]. In fact, any nonzero epsilon will do the job!
A quick remark is in order: this trick is nice, but we might run into trouble if the field k is

not infinite, because the polynomial constraints satisfied by the original variables xi might
place restrictions on the allowable values of ϵ.
Proof of Noether Normalization. We use induction on the minimal number of generators
n of A.
The base case, n = 0, is clear.
Suppose that n > 0; if there exist x1, . . . , xn
algebraically independent elements of A then we can take ti = xi and conclude. Otherwise,
for any set of n elements x1, . . . , xn of A there is a polynomial F \ink[X1, . . . , Xn] such that
F(x1, . . . , xn) = 0. By Lemma 1.4 there are x∗
1, . . . , x∗
$$
n-1 \inA such that A = A∗[xn]. By the
$$
inductive hypothesis, there are t1, . . . , tm \inA∗algebraically independent over k such that
A∗is finite over k[t1, . . . , tm]. Since xn is integral over A∗, it follows that A = A∗[xn] is finite
over k[t1, . . . , tm], by the tower law for finite extensions.
$\square$
