# Lecture 13 — Fibered products and co-products

*MATH 464, Rice University, Spring 2020 · February 12, 2020*

---

## 1. Fibered products and co-products
Last time we saw that if B and C are A-algebras (so in particular, they are A-modules),
then the tensor product B $\otimes$A C is not just an A-module: it can also be given the structure
of a ring, and this ring satisfies a universal property, making it the pushout in the category
of rings.
**Definition 1.1**. Let C be a category, and let f : A \toB and g: A \toC be morphisms in C.
The pushout or fibered coproduct of f and g consists of an object B ∗A C of C, together with
$$
maps p1 : B \toB ∗A \mathbb{C} and p2 : \mathbb{C} \toB ∗A \mathbb{C} such that the diagram
$$
A
f
/
g

B
p1

C
p2/ B ∗A C
commutes, and such that the following universal mapping property holds: given an object
T, together with maps B \toT and C \toT that commute with f and g, there exists a unique
map B ∗A C \toT making the triangles in the following diagram
A
f
/
g

B
p1


C
p2/
)
B ∗A C
∃!
# T
commute.
Pushouts are examples of colimits. In fact, you’ve seen other examples of colimits already:
coproducts and direct limits.
We also have the following related construction.
**Definition 1.2**. Let C be a category, and let f : X \toS and g: Y \toS be morphisms in
C. The pullback or fibered product of f and g consists of an object X ×S Y , together with
maps p1 : X ×S Y \toX and p2 : X ×S Y \toY commuting with f and g, such that the

following universal mapping property holds: given an object Z, together with maps Z \toX
and Z \toY that commute with f and g, there exists a unique map Z \toX ×S Y making
the triangles in the following diagram
Z
)

∃!
#
X ×S Y
p2
/
p1

Y

X
/ S
commute.
Pullbacks are examples of a general categorical construction called limits.
**Remark 1.3**. By the usual argument (which I hope you’ve now internalized), pushouts and
pullbacks, if they exist, are unique, up to a unique isomorphism (that commutes with the
right maps).
**Remark 1.4**. You should convince yourself that for coproducts, fibered coproducts, and col-
imits, the arrows all “go the same way,” in the following sense. For each of these three
objects, the object comes with maps from the objects in a given diagram, and has a map
to any other object that also has maps from the objects in the diagram. (with everything
commuting appropriately).
The same holds for products, fibered products, and limits. The object comes with maps
to the objects in a given diagram, and has a map from any other object that also has maps
to the objects in the diagram.
---
## 2. Examples!
You should check the following examples via the universal property.
**Example 2.1**. Take C = (Sets), let U and V be sets. Then the pushout of the inclusions
$$
U \capV ,\toU and U \capV ,\toV is U \cupV , together with the inclusions U \toU \cupV and
V \toU \cupV .
$$
**Example 2.2**. Take C = (Top): the category of topological spaces together with continuous
maps. Recall that $\emptyset$is an initial object in this category. The pushout of $\emptyset$\toU and $\emptyset$\toV
is just the disjoint union U ⊔V , together with the usual maps U \toU ⊔V and V \toU ⊔V .
**Example 2.3**. Quite generally, in (Top), the pushout of f : W \toU and g: W \toV is given
by
U ⊔V
$$
.
$$
f(w) ∼g(w) ∀w \inW
$$
In particular, if W = {pt}, and x0 and y0 are the images of {pt} in X and Y , respectively,
$$
the pushout X ∗{pt} Y is just the wedge sum X ∨Y that identifies x0 and y0.

**Example 2.4**. Take C = (Top). The pullback of inclusions of open sets U ,\toX and
$$
V ,\toX is U \capV , together with the inclusions U \capV \toU and U \capV \toV .
$$
**Example 2.5**. Take C = (Top) again. Recall that the one-point space {pt} is a final object
in this category. The pullback of U \to{pt} and V \to{pt} is just the usual product U × V ,
$$
together with the projections U \times V \toU and U \times V \toV .
$$
**Example 2.6**. Quite generally, in (Top), the pullback of f : X \toS and g: Y \toS is given
by
$$
{(x, y) \inX \times Y : f(x) = g(y)}.
In particular, if g: Y \toS is just the inclusion of a point s \inS, i.e., Y = {s} and g: {s} ,\toS,
then X \timesS {s} is just the fiber of f at s, i.e., X \timesS {s} = f -1(s).
$$
**Example 2.7**. Pushouts exist in the Category (Groups). The pushout of {e} \toG1 and
$$
{e} \toG2 is known as the free product of G1 and G2, and is denoted G1 ∗G2.
$$
More generally, the pushout G1 ×H G2 of φ1 : H \toG1 and φ2 : H \toG2 is called the free
product with amalgamation. It can be described as follows: let N be the normal subgroup of
the free product G1 ∗G2 generated by the set of words
$$
{φ1(h)φ2(h)-1 : h \inH}.
Then G1 ∗H G2 = G1 ∗G2/N.
$$
**Example 2.8**. The (covariant) fundamental group funtor π1 : (Top) \to(Groups) pre-
serves certain pushouts. For example, if (X, x0) is a path-connected topological space, and
{(U, x0), (V, x0)} is a path-connected open cover of X such that U ∩V is also path-connected,
then π1 preserves the pushout diagram
U ∩V
/

U

V
/ X
In other words, the diagram
π1(U ∩V, x0)
/

π1(U, x0)

π1(V, x0)
/ π1(X, x0)
is a pushout in the category of groups. This means that, omitting base-points,
$$
π1(X) \simeq π1(U) ∗π1(U\capV ) π1(V ).
$$
This last statement is a baby version of the Seifert-van Kampen Theorem. In particular, if
$$
U \capV = {pt}, we recover the isomorphism
$$
π1(X ∨Y ) \simeq π1(X) ∗π1(Y ).

**Example 2.9**. For today’s last example, we talked briefly about how to build a CW-complex
using pushouts. Recall an n-cell is a copy of Rn, which we can think of as the interior of the
n-disk Dn. Attaching an n-cell to a topological space A is the same thing as constructing
the pushout of the maps
Sn-1  
i
/
φ

Dn
A
The map φ is called the attaching map and it tells you how to glue the boundary Sn-1 of the
n-disk Dn to A. This pushout is denoted A ∪φ Dn and it is given by
A ⊔Dn.
φ(s) ∼i(s) ∀s \inS
To build a CW complex X, we start with $\emptyset$, and we attach n-cells in order:
(0) The 0-skeleton X(0) is obtained by attaching 0-cells to A = $\emptyset$: here S-1 = $\emptyset$and
$$
D0 = {pt}.
$$
(1) The 1-skeleton X(1) is obtained by attaching 1-cells to X(0): here S0 = {±1}. Let
$$
I1 be an index set for 1-cells. For α \inI1, the attaching map φα : S0 \toX(0) tells us
$$
where to glue the end-points of the line segment D1
α. We have
$$
X(1) = X(0) \cup⊔φα
$$
G
α\inI1
D1
α.
(2) The 2-skeleton X(2) is obtained by attaching 2-cells to X(1). Let I2 be an index set
for 2-cells. For α \inI2, the attaching map φα : S1 \toX(1) tells us where to glue the
boundary of the disk D2
α. We have
$$
X(2) = X(1) \cup⊔φα
$$
G
α\inI2
D2
α.
(3) And so on...
