# Lecture 12 — Adjoint functors: category theory interlude

*MATH 464, Rice University, Spring 2020 · February 10, 2020*

---

## 1. Adjoint functors: category theory interlude
Last time we saw that HomA(N, · ) and · $\otimes$A N are adjoint to each other. This is an example of
$$
the following general phenomenon. Let \mathbb{C} and D be categories, and let F : \mathbb{C} \toD and G: D \toC be
$$
covariant functors. We say that F and G form an adjoint pair if for every A \inOb(C), B \inOb(D),
we have a bijection of sets
HomC(A, G(B)) \simeq HomD(F(A), B),
which is natural in A and B, meaning that if f : A \toA′ is a map in C, then the diagram
HomC(A′, G(B))
∼
=
/
f∗

HomD(F(A′), B)
F(f)∗

HomC(A, G(B))
∼
=
/ HomD(F(A), B),
$$
commutes, and ditto for an arrow g: B′ \toB.
$$
We say that F is a left adjoint for G and that G is a left adjoint for F.
A functor is called additive if it preserves direct sums: F(A $\oplus$A′) ≃F(A) $\oplus$F(A′).
The proof that tensor is right exact shows quite generally that, given a pair of additive adjoint
functors, a left adjoint functor preserves right exact sequences, provided exact sequences make
sense. Similarly, a right adjoint functor preserves left exact sequences.
**Example 1.1**. This all started with the example of HomA(N, ·) and · $\otimes$A N.
**Example 1.2**. The functors “free” and “forget” are adjoint. More precisely, let F : (Sets) \to
(Groups) be the functor that takes a set S to the free group F(S) generated by that set (what does
it do to arrows? —use the universal mapping property of a free group!) and let | · |: (Groups) \to
(Sets) be the funtor that takes a group G and forgets the group structure (i.e., we only keep the
set G). I claim there are bijections
Hom(Groups)(F(S), G) \simeq Hom(Sets)(S, |G|)
that are natural in the sense above.
**Example 1.3**. Let F : (Groups) \to(Ab) be the functor from groups to abelian groups that takes
a group G to Gab := G/[G, G], where [G, G] is the commutator subgroup of G. You should check
that a map f : G \toH gives rise to a map Gab \toHab, so that we really have a functor here. Let
G: (Ab) ,\to(Groups) be the inclusion of the subcategory of abelian groups, so that G(H) = H.

Then there is a natural bijection
Hom(Ab)(Gab, H) \simeq Hom(Groups)(G, H).
---
## 2. Tensor products of Algebras
The tensor product of two A-modules B $\otimes$A C is again an A-module. It’d be nice if we could
define a multiplication structure on B $\otimes$A C; it would make the product into a ring, together with
scalar multiplication by elements of A, i.e, we’d get an A-algebra. This can happen if B and C are
rings themselves.
$$
Let B, \mathbb{C} be two A-algebras, defined by the ring homomorphisms f : A \toB and g: A \toC. Put
D := B \otimesA \mathbb{C}. The map
B \times \mathbb{C} \times B \times \mathbb{C} \toD
(b, c, b′, c′) 7\tobb′ \otimescc′
$$
is A-linear in each argument, so it induces an A-module map
$$
B \otimesC \otimesB \otimesC \toD
b \otimesc \otimesb′ \otimesc′ 7\tobb′ \otimescc′
$$
By associativity of tensor products we get an A-module map
$$
D \otimesD \toD
(b \otimesc) \otimes(b′ \otimesc′) 7\tobb′ \otimescc′
$$
This map in turn gives us the A-bilinear map
$$
µ: D \times D \toD
(b \otimesc, b′ \otimesc′) 7\tobb′ \otimescc′
$$
This map defines multiplication on B $\otimes$A C!!! In general, the multiplication looks as follows:
 X
i
(bi $\otimes$ci)
 X
j
(b′
$$
j \otimesc′
$$
j)

=
 X
i,j
(bib′
$$
j \otimescic′
$$
j)

$$
.
$$
This multiplication makes D a commutative ring with unit; the unit is 1 $\otimes$1.
In the category (Rings) of commutative rings with unit, tensor product can be characterized as
follows:
**Proposition 2**. 1 (Universal property of tensor products in (Rings)). Let f : A \toB and g: A \toC
be ring homomorphisms. Define maps
$$
p1 : B \toB \otimesA \mathbb{C}
and
p2 : \mathbb{C} \toB \otimesA \mathbb{C},
$$
respectively given by b \mapstob $\otimes$1 and c \mapsto1 $\otimes$c. Let T be a ring, together with maps B \toT and
C \toT such that the diagram
A
f
/
g

B

C
/ T

commutes. Then there exists a unique map B $\otimes$A C \toT such that the triangles in the diagram
A
f
/
g

B
p1


C
p2/
)
B $\otimes$A C
∃!
# T
commute.
---
## 3. Fibered products and co-products
The diagram above is a special case of of a push-out, or a fibered co-product: what it says is that
push-outs exist in the category (Rings); they are given by tensor product. It’s time to make a
category theory pit-stop.
**Definition 3.1**. Let C be a category, and let f : A \toB and g: A \toC be morphisms in C. The
pushout or fibered coproduct of f and g consists of an object B ∗A C of C, together with maps
$$
p1 : B \toB ∗A \mathbb{C} and p2 : \mathbb{C} \toB ∗A \mathbb{C} such that the diagram
$$
A
f
/
g

B
p1

C
p2 / B ∗A C
commutes, and such that the following universal mapping property holds: given an object T,
together with maps B \toT and C \toT that commute with f and g, there exists a unique map
B ∗A C \toT making the triangles in the following diagram
A
f
/
g

B
p1


C
p2 /
)
B ∗A C
∃!
# T
commute.
