# Lecture 15 — Symmetric algebra, continued

*MATH 464, Rice University, Spring 2020 · February 19, 2020*

---

A is a commutative ring with unit. All modules considered are A-modules.
---
## 1. Symmetric algebra, continued
Recall that last class we ended with the proof of the following theorem:
**Theorem 1.1**. Let M be free over A of dimension n, and let {x1, . . . , xn} be a basis. Viewed
as elements of S1(M), these basis elements are algebraically independent over A, and there-
fore S(M) is isomorphic to the polynomial algebra in n variables over A. This isomorphism
is graded, in the sense that Sd(M) is isomorphic to the A-module of degree d polynomials in
n variables.
This has a nice corollary.
**Corollary 1.2**. Let E and F be finite free modules. Then the natural map
$$
S(E) \otimesS(F) \toS(E \oplusF)
$$
is a graded isomorphism, meaning that its restrictions
M
$$
p+q=n
Sp(E) \otimesSq(F) \toSn(E \oplusF)
$$
are isomorphisms of A-modules.
---
## 2. Alternating algebra
We saw last time that if M is an A-module, then it is possible to mod out by enough
relations in the graded pieces of T(M) to get a commutative ring. Suppose we wanted in-
stead to have our elements anticommute, so, for example, in T 2(M) we’d like to force that
x $\otimes$y = -y $\otimes$x. Note that this is the same as x $\otimes$y + y $\otimes$x = 0. If x = y and if the charac-
teristic of A is not 2, then we obtain x $\otimes$x = 0. Conversely (and without assuming that the
characteristic of A is not 2), suppose that x$\otimes$x = 0 always holds. Then (x+y)$\otimes$(x+y) = 0
implies that x $\otimes$y + y $\otimes$x = 0. So in order for our theory to work in characteristic 2, the
right thing to do is to mod out by tensors where at least two of the components are equal.
This motivates the following construction.

Let ar be the submodule of T r(M) generated by all elements of the form
$$
x1 \otimes\cdot \cdot \cdot \otimesxr
where xi = xj fo some i \neq j.
$$
and define
r^
$$
(M) = T r(M)/ar
$$
The composition map
$$
φ: M \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times M
$$
|
{z
}
r times
$$
\toT r(M) \toT r(M)/ar =
$$
r^
(M)
is an alternating map. Here’s what I mean by that.
**Definition 2.1**. An A-multilinear map
$$
f : M \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times M
$$
|
{z
}
r times
\toN
is called alternating if
f(x1, . . . , xr) = 0
$$
whenever xi = xj fo some i \neq j.
$$
The map φ above is universal amongst A-multilinear alternating maps on M: suppose
that
$$
f : M \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times M
$$
|
{z
}
r times
\toN
is an A-multilinear alternating map. Then f factors uniquely through φ. We write x1∧· · ·∧xn
for the image of (x1, . . . , xn) under φ. Note that if f : M \toN is an A-module map, then
the composition
T r(M)
T r(f)
$$
---\toT r(N) \toT r(N)/ar =
$$
r^
(N)
canonically gives rise of an A-multilinear alternating map
$$
M \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times M \to
$$
r^
(N)
and thus we obtain a map
r^
(f):
r^
(M) \to
r^
(N)
by the universal mapping property of Vr(M). In this way we get a functor
r^
$$
: (A-Mod) \to(A-Mod).
$$
The maps
r^
(M) ×
s^
(M) \to
r+s
^
(M)
(x1 ∧· · · ∧xr, y1 ∧· · · ∧ys) \mapstox1 ∧· · · ∧xr ∧y1 ∧· · · ∧ys

define a multiplication on
^
$$
(M) :=
$$
∞
M
r=0
r^
(M),
giving V(M) a ring structure compatible with the A-module structure of the direct sum, i.e.,
we get an A-algebra structure. This algebra is called the alternating algebra, or the exterior
algebra, or the Grassmann algebra. The functors Vr can be pasted together to form a functor
^
$$
: (A-Mod) \to(A-Alg).
$$
We’ll soon see that the algebra structure of V(M) is graded.
**Example 2.2**. Say A = k is a field and M = V is a 2-dimensional k-vector space, with basis
e1, e2. Then V2 V consists of finite sums of elements of the form
$$
(ae1 + be2) \wedge(ce1 + de2)
$$
Expanding this out we get
$$
ac(e1 \wedgee1) + ad(e1 \wedgee2) + bc(e2 \wedgee1) + bd(e2 \wedgee2) = (ad -bc)(e1 \wedgee2)
$$
From this simple calculation we see a couple of things:
(1) V2 V is 1-dimensional with basis e1 ∧e2.
(2) V2 V has something to do with determinants.
Note that ∧rV = 0 if r ≥3, since, for example e1 ∧e1 ∧e2 = 0 (the Pigeon-hole principle is
in action here!). Hence
^
$$
(V ) = k \oplusV \oplusk,
$$
and multiplication is given by
$$
(α, ae1 + be2, βe1 \wedgee2) \cdot (α′, a′e1 + b′e2, β′e1 \wedgee2) =
(αα′, (αa′ + α′a)e1 + (αb′ + α′b)e2, (ab′ -a′b + αβ′ + α′β)e1 \wedgee2)
$$
**Theorem 2.3**. Let M be a free module of finite rank n over a (nonzero) ring A. Fix an
A-basis e1, . . . , en for M.
$$
(1) If 1 \leqr \leqn then Vr(M) is free over A and the elements
{ei1 \wedge\cdot \cdot \cdot \wedgeeir : i1 < i2 < \cdot \cdot \cdot < ir}
$$
form a basis of Vr(M) over A.
$$
(2) If r > n then Vr(M) = 0.
$$
(3) We have rkA
Vr(M) =
n
r

$$
.
$$
*Proof.* First we prove (1) in the case r = n. Every element of M can be written as P aiei;
using the fact that x ∧y = -y ∧x, we conclude that Vn(M) is spanned by e1 ∧· · · ∧en. It
is not clear, however, that this element is non-zero! Exercise: there is a unique multilinear

$$
alternating form f : M \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times M \toA such that
$$
f(e1, . . . , en) = 1.
[Hint: this can be proved by induction on the number of copies of M. The function f can be
defined using the formula for a determinant.] It follows that there is a unique A-linear map
n^
(M) \toA
taking the value 1 on e1 ∧· · · ∧en. A-linearity shows that e1 ∧· · · ∧en cannot be the zero
vector!
We’ll finish the rest of the proof next class.
$\square$
