# Lecture 09 — Tensor products of modules

*MATH 464, Rice University, Spring 2020 · February 3, 2020*

---

## 1. Tensor products of modules
Let A be a commutative ring with unit. Taking a cue from the example we saw last time, where
we were thinking of how to construct a product vector space from two vector spaces, we define the
tensor product of two A-modules M and N as follows. First, let T be the free A-module with one
generator for each element (x, y) \inM × N. You should be thinking: this is a truly massive free
module1!
You should think of the elements of T as the result of multiplying two vectors. Of course, we
can’t multiply vectors, let alone vectors from diﬀerent modules, but we’re trying to build a product
module, and we have to start somewhere. The next task is to figure out what kind of relations
we’d like our product vectors to satisfy. For example, if I scale x \inM by a \inA and I multiply the
result by y \inN, I’d like that to be the same vector in my product module as if I had scaled (x, y)
by a. So we’d like the following relation to hold:
$$
a(x, y) -(ax, y) = 0.
$$
Similarly, it would be good to have
$$
a(x, y) -(x, ay) = 0.
$$
Finally, it’d be good if our multiplication of vectors respects addition in each of the modules
involved, so we’d like the following to be true:
$$
(x, y + y′) -(x, y) -(x, y′) = 0
and
(x + x′, y) -(x, y) -(x′, y) = 0.
$$
The idea is to force these relations to happen, by taking the submodule T ′ \subseteqT generated by the
elements
$$
(x, y + y′) -(x, y) -(x, y′)
$$
for all x \inM,
$$
y, y′ \inN
(x + x′, y) -(x, y) -(x′, y)
for all x, x′ \inM,
$$
y \inN
a(x, y) -(ax, y)
for all x \inM,
y \inN,
a \inA
a(x, y) -(x, ay)
for all x \inM,
y \inN,
a \inA
This is a massive submodule of T. The tensor product of M and N (over A) is the A-module T/T ′,
$$
and is denoted M \otimesA N. The image of (x, y) \inT in M \otimesA N is denoted x \otimesy.
$$
> Every class has a student that I like to call the keeper of the empty set. It’s the person who is always asking “But
what about the empty set?” If M and N are the zero modules, then of course, T is not huge at all. But if M and N
are in any way interesting, then T is pretty massive.

There is a A-bilinear (i.e. A-linear in each argument) map
$$
g: M \times N \toM \otimesA N
(x, y) 7\tox \otimesy.
$$
This map can be used to characterize the tensor product, via the following universal property: any
bilinear map f : M×N \toP factors though g, i.e., there is a unique map of A-modules M$\otimes$AN \toP
making the following diagram commute:
M × N
f
/
g

P
M $\otimes$A N
∃!
:
This property tells us there is bijection
$$
{A-bilinear maps M \times N \toP} \leftarrow\toHomA(M \otimesA N, P)
$$
To see that M $\otimes$A N really has the property we claim it does, we have to recall the universal
property that free modules satisfy: if F(S) = L
s\inS A is the free A-module on the set S, then for
every map of sets S \toM there is a unique map F(S) \toM of A-modules such that the diagram
F(S)
∃!

S
=
/ M
commutes. Since T is the free module on the elements of M × N, a map f : M × N \toP gives a
unique A-module homomorphism T \toP making the following diagram commute
T
∃!

M × N
;
/ P
The bilinearity of f implies that the map T \toP factors uniquely through T \toT/T ′ = M $\otimes$A N.
This gives the unique map M $\otimes$A N \toP required for the universal property.
Now you should have no trouble showing that tensor products are unique up to unique isomorphism!
**Remark 1.1**. An element of M $\otimes$A N has the form Pn
$$
i=1 xi \otimesyi.
$$
**Remark 1.2**. The notation x $\otimes$y is a ambiguous. You should never forget where x and y live. For
example: take A = Z, M = Z and N = Z/2Z, and let x \inN be the nontrivial element. Then
$$
2 \otimesx = 2 \cdot (1 \otimesx) = 1 \otimes2x = 0. However, if M′ = 2Z, then 2 \otimesx, considered as an element of
M′ \otimesA N is not zero!
$$
**Example 1.3**. Let p and q be distinct primes. Consider the tensor product of Z-modules Z/pZ$\otimes$Z
$$
\mathbb{Z}/qZ. Say x \neq 0. Then
x \otimesy = (qq-1x \otimesy) = q(q-1x \otimesy) = q-1x \otimesqy = q-1x \otimes0 = 0.
Hence \mathbb{Z}/pZ \otimesZ \mathbb{Z}/qZ = 0. In general, what can you say about \mathbb{Z}/nZ \otimesZ \mathbb{Z}/mZ?
$$

**Example 1.4**. Using the universal property of tensor products, one can show that Q(
√
2) $\otimes$Q
Q(
√
3) \simeq Q(
√
2,
√
3). More precisely, there is a bijection
{Q-bilinear maps Q(
√
2) × Q(
√
$$
3) \toP} \leftarrow\toHomQ(\mathbb{Q}(
$$
√
2,
√
3), P).
For example, given a Q-bilinear map f : Q(
√
2)×Q(
√
$$
3) \toP, we get an element g \inHomQ(\mathbb{Q}(
$$
√
2,
√
3), P)
by setting
g(a + b
√
2 + c
√
3 + d
√
$$
6) = a \cdot f((1, 1)) + b \cdot f((
$$
√
2, 1)) + c · f((1,
√
3)) + d · f((
√
2,
√
3)).
**Example 1.5**. Here’s a more interesting example: what is Q(
√
2) $\otimes$Q Q(
√
2)? According to our
intuition from vector spaces, this is supposed to be a 4-dimensional Q-vector space. The key point
to keep in mind is that we have been a bit imprecise when we used the symbol
√
2 twice. By this
symbol, we mean a root of the equation x2 -2 = 0. We are trying to tensor two vector spaces
where we might have chosen a diﬀerent root for the equation! So we should be thinking that we
are computing
$$
\mathbb{Q}[x]/(x2 -2) \otimesQ \mathbb{Q}[y]/(y2 -2),
$$
Now the symbols x and y stand for our possibly diﬀerent square roots, and it is not hard to check
that
$$
\mathbb{Q}[x, y]/(x2 -2, y2 -2)
$$
satisfies the universal property to be the tensor product. This is indeed a 4-dimensional vector
$$
space over \mathbb{Q}, and a basis for it is {1, x, y, xy}.
$$
